{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2709
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Bold;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs60 \cf2 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone Neptune User Guide\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \
Introduction\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Neptune is a four pole diode ladder filter inspired by the diode ladder filter designed by Moritz Klein. It is intended to be able to be the beating heart of a synth voice, bringing together sound sources and modulation. It has two inputs going to the filter core, a Low Pass Filter, and a High Pass Filter. With these two inputs you can use the filter in many different ways, without needing discreet modes. It is designed to offer a very wide range of possible sonic signatures, from smooth and clean to rough and dirty, all depending on how you patch it.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 Specifications\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Available\'a0assembled\'a0or as a\'a0kit\
12 HP\
+12 V @ 
\f0\b TBD
\f1\b0  mA,\'a0-12 V @ 
\f0\b TBD
\f1\b0  mA\
25 mm\'a0deep\
2 filter inputs, low pass and high pass\
Self oscillating at high resonance levels\
Salt feedback circuit to dirty up the sound\
Lights indicating the CV levels of the 4 main controls\
DC coupled signal path\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 Getting support and help\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 Installation\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 Overview\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Neptune is a single filter, but with two inputs going to the same filter core. One is a low pass, and the other is a high pass. Using them separately gives you the functions of a low pass filter, and a high pass filter, but using them together gives you the ability to fade between the frequencies of two signals, picking out the low frequencies of one input and the high frequencies of another. You also have control over the Resonance, which gives a volume boost to the frequencies at the cutoff frequency. Salt is a feedback circuit which when used subtly can add a bit of grit and heft to the sound, or when turned up can create strange semi chaotic oscillations.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \
Controls\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Cutoff\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Controls the Cutoff frequency of the filter. It controls the point at which high frequencies are cut out from the low pass input, and when low frequencies are cut from the high pass input. The LEDS to the left of the knob indicate the low pass filter opening up, and the LEDs to the right indicate the high pass filter opening up.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Reso\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Controls the Resonance. It increases the volume of frequencies at the Cutoff frequency. When turned above the white dot the filter will begin self oscillating, with a red LED indicating self oscillation. Many filters cut out the bass frequencies when the resonance is turned up. This filter does not have that effect, preserving all your bass as the resonance is turned up. But because of this the input volume can overwhelm the resonance, making the resonance very subtle with high input volumes. To get a \'93sweeter\'94 sound to the resonance, try turning the input volume down when the resonance is turned up.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Salt\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Controls the depth of a feedback circuit which at low levels can introduce a bit of grit to the sound, and at high levels can make the filter oscillate chaotically. This control is strongly interlinked with Resonance, the higher the Resonance, the more chaotic and unstable the effect Salt will have.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 FM1\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
An attenuverter controlling the depth of the modulation of the filter cutoff. Turning to the right introduces the modulation unaffected, and to the left inverts the modulation. The LEDs indicate the polarity and depth of modulation. Blue LEDs indicate positive modulation, and red indicates negative.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 FM2\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
An attenuator controlling the depth of the modulation of the filter cutoff. The marking indicates rough v/oct tracking.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 LP Vol\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Volume of the low pass input. The marking indicates that the input and output volume are matched (unity gain). Because of the architecture of this filter, the sound of the resonance is strongly affected by the input volume, the louder the input volume, the less obvious and \'93sweet\'94 the resonance, to get resonance that really catches the harmonics of the input, try turning the input volume down as you turn the resonance up.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 HP Vol\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Volume of the high pass input.  The marking indicates that the input and output volume are matched (unity gain). Because of the architecture of this filter, the sound of the resonance is strongly affected by the input volume, the louder the input volume, the less obvious and \'93sweet\'94 the resonance, to get resonance that really catches the harmonics of the input, try turning the input volume down as you turn the resonance up.\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \
\
Inputs and Outputs\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 LP\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Audio Input to the low pass filter. The volume is affected by the associated knob\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 \
HP\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Audio Input to the high pass filter. The volume is affected by the associated knob.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 FM1\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
CV input to control Cutoff Frequency. Controlled by the FM1 attenuverter.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 FM2\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
CV input to control Cutoff Frequency. Controlled by the FM2 attenuator.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Reso\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
CV input to control Resonance.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Salt\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
CV input to control Salt.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Vol\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
CV input to control the volume of the output.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Out\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Audio output.\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 Common Uses\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
This filter is not designed to have modes. Instead it is designed to be patched in different ways to get different filter responses. Here are some common filter applications and how to implement them with this filter\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Low Pass filter\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
To use it like a low pass filter, send your input to the LP input, with nothing in the HP input, or the HP input volume all the way down.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 High Pass Filter\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
To use it like a low pass filter, send your input to the HP input, with nothing in the LP input, or the LP input volume all the way down.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 High/Low Shelf Filter\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
To use it like a high/low shelf filter, send the same input to both the LP and HP inputs. The different volume levels act like your shelves, with the low pass volume acting like the low shelf and the high pass volume acting like the high shelf. With this configuration the resonance acts like a frequency boost, so you can emphasize a certain frequency without cutting out the rest.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Spectral Crossfader\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
To use it like a spectral crossfader, fading between the frequencies of two inputs, send different inputs to LP in and HP in. The cutoff knob controls the frequency at which the two inputs are filtered. This way you can pick out the high frequencies of one input, and the low frequencies of  another.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \
Patch Ideas\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Basic Synth Voice\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Use any oscillator as the input for the LP in, preferably with a sharp waveform like a saw or square. Try adjusting the cutoff frequency, fm1 amount, resonance, and salt to hear the range of possible sounds from the low pass filter. Use an envelope going the FM1 and Volume. Trigger the envelope with a gate source from a keyboard or sequencer or any gate source. Adjust the envelope timings to get long drones notes, or quick percussive ones. Try adjusting the cutoff frequency and fm1 amount to get different types of sounds.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Spectral Crossfading Synth Voice\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Use one oscillator to LP in, and another oscillator to HP in. (Or use different waveforms from the same oscillator). Make sure the oscillators are tuned close to each other for the most harmonious sound. Listen to how the filter can fade between the frequencies of the two oscillator signals. Now plug one envelope to FM1 and a different envelope to Vol. Trigger the envelopes with the same gate source, from a keyboard or a sequencer or any gate source. Try different envelope shapes to get different responses, and listen to how different input signals and volumes effect the sound. Try different oscillator tunings, at octaves or ratios for nice harmonic sounds, or detuned for more dissonant ones.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Kick Drum Voice\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
No inputs to HP or LP. Turn resonance up until the filter starts self oscillating. Send a fast exponential envelope to FM1 input and a second slower envelope to Vol. The fast exponential envelope is the kick drum\'92s pitch sweep, whose intensity is adjusted with FM1. Adjust the cutoff frequency to set the base pitch of the drum sound, set it around 9 o\'92clock for a low bass drum sound. Try increasing the resonance or adding salt to increase the grittiness of the drum.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Chaotic Oscillator\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Turn the resonance up until the filter starts self oscillating. Turn the salt up until it just starts to get chaotic. The filter cutoff frequency will twist and wobble around, making a chaotic output which is a combination of feedback effects. Try adjusting the cutoff frequency, resonance, and salt to get a whole spectrum of sounds, from stable and harmonious, to wild and unstable.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Drum Effects\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Send a drum mix, either a recording or a mix of synthesized drums, to the LP input and HP input. This will make the filter act like a shelf filter. The LP and HP volume act as the level for the low shelf and the high shelf. The cutoff controls the crossover point of the shelves. Try adding a bit of resonance, lowering the high pass volume a bit to make a low shelf filter, and adjusting the cutoff frequency to target specific frequencies in the drum mix, for example to emphasize the snare, or get rid of some of the high frequencies without cutting them out completely like on a traditional low pass filter.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 Loop Crossfader\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Use a device like an Octatrack, Digitakt, or any sampler that can output two different loops matched to the same tempo. Send one loop to the LP in, and the other loop to the HP in. Adjusting the cutoff frequency will allow you to fade between the frequencies of the two loops. If the cutoff knob is fully to the right you will only hear the loop in the low pass input. If it if fully to the left you will only hear the loop in the high pass input. You can adjust it to pick out the high frequencies of one loop, like the cymbals, and the low frequencies of another loop, like the bass drum.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf2 CV Filter\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
This filter is DC coupled, so will allow CV signals to pass through and be filtered the same way audio is. If you send an input to the LP inout the output will act like a slew limiter, limiting how fast the signal can move. A signal to the HP input will be output a bit like a gate to trigger converter, where sudden movements will be output, but it will settle back to the value at the LP input. The resonance control will affect the output\'92s ability to overshoot the input value and \'93ring\'94. The cutoff knob control is designed with audio in mind, so the lowest cutoff frequency the knob can reach is around 5hz. But inverted modulation can be applied to the FM1 attenuverter to lower the cutoff frequency further than the knob will go. This filter was designed with audio in mind, so it will not be accurate enough to filter very sensitive CV signals like v/oct.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 Open source hardware & software\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 Warranty, disclaimers, and limits\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 Acknowledgments and thanks\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs22 \cf2 \
Neptune would not be possible without the excellent educational YouTube videos by Moritz Klein, and the help of him and others on his discord server. We would also like to acknowledge the following individuals for their outstanding support:\
\
\
Ben Wilson\
Sarah Ocean\
Izaak Hollander\
}